Initial commit of Plugin Installation Manager tool documentation.(JIRA Issue WEBSITE-775) (#4373)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/managing/plugin-install-manager.adoc

---
layout: section
---
ifdef::backend-html5[]
:notitle:
:description:
:author:
:email: jenkinsci-docs@googlegroups.com
:sectanchors:
:toc:
ifdef::env-github[:imagesdir: ../resources]
ifndef::env-github[:imagesdir: ../../resources]
:hide-uri-scheme:
endif::[]

= Plugin Installation Manager Tool

> Plugin Installation Manager is a command line tool used to manage the installation, upgrade and plugin dependency of plugins on a controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Plugin Installation Manager is a command line tool used to manage the installation, upgrade and plugin dependency of plugins on a controller.
```

> Using this tool installed on a Jenkins controller, many plugins and their dependent plugins can be installed by a single execution of this tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When installed on a Jenkins controller, a single execution of the Plugin Installation Manager can install many plugins and their dependent plugins.
```

> The common scenario of plugin installation preview, dependency management, and upgrade will be demonstrated in the remainder of the section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The common scenario of plugin installation preview, dependency management, and upgrade are demonstrated in the remainder of the section.
```

The plugin used in these examples is the plugin:kubernetes[Kubernetes Plugin].
Note that the plugin is specified in the form <plugin name>:<version>, as in `kubernetes:1.29.6`.

> This 22 minute tutorial from Darin Pope installs Jenkins plugins from the command line using plugin installation manager tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This 22 minute tutorial from Darin Pope installs Jenkins plugins from the command line using the plugin installation manager tool.
```

An example command to invoke '2.11.0' version of the tool is given below:

[source]
----
$ java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war $JENKINS_HOME/jenkins.war \# <1>
     --available-updates \
     --plugin-download-directory . \# <2>
     --plugins 'blueocean:1.24.7 docker-workflow:1.25' \# <3>
     --output txt \# <4>
     --verbose
blueocean:1.24.8
docker-workflow:1.26
----

<1> (_Optional_) Path to Jenkins war file. Default location used is
    /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war in Linux and
    C:\ProgramData\Jenkins\jenkins.war in Microsoft Windows.

<2> (_Optional_) (-d) Directory in which to install plugins. This option can be
    configured using the PLUGIN_DIR environment variable. The default is
    $JENKINS_HOME/plugins.

<3> (_Optional_) List of plugins to install (plugin version format is specified
    below), separated by a space.

<4> (_Optional_) Format of output about plugin updates to file or stdout. stdout is
    the default. The ouput format can be text, JSON or YAML.

IMPORTANT:

* The location of the jenkins.war file is dependent on the operating system the controller is using

> * Run the commands listed in this section as Jenkins Administrator user

Reviewer: Should this specify the actual permissions that are required?

> * After install or upgrade of plugin(s) on UNIX/Linux systems, make sure the Jenkins user id and group id own respective plugin *.jpi files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* After installing or upgrading plugin(s) on UNIX/Linux systems, make sure the Jenkins user id and group id own respective plugin *.jpi files
```

> * Restart controller after install or upgrade of plugin(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Always restart the controller after installing or upgrading plugin(s)
```

=== Generate the list of plugins installed

> The plugins installed on a controller can be listed using the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following command to list all plugins installed on a controller:
```

      plugins that will be downloaded (highest required versions of the requested plugins and dependencies that are not already installed),
      the effective plugin set (the highest versions of all plugins that are already installed or will be installed)

<2> (_Optional_) Do not download plugins when the `--no-download` flag is used.

=== Listing plugin dependencies

The following command outputs the plugin and complete list of dependent plugins with version information.
This information can be redirected to an output file.
This file can be used as input to the tool to install or upgrade this plugin and the dependent plugin(s).
Example plugin used in plugin installation preview is Kubernetes plugin version 1.29.2

[source,bash]
----
java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war \
     --available-updates \# <1>
     --plugin-download-directory . \
     --output txt \
     --plugins kubernetes:1.29.2
----

<1> (_Optional_) Indicates if the specified plugins have newer versions available.
This information is based on the specific Jenkins Update Center being used.

=== Previewing installation of plugins

> The following command outputs the plugin and it's dependent plugins' with version information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command lists the plugin and its dependent plugins with version information.
```

These are the plugins that need to be installed  on *this* controller installation.
Example plugin used in plugin installation preview is Kubernetes plugin version 1.29.2.

[source,bash]
----
java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war $JENKINS_HOME/jenkins.war \
     --available-updates \
     --plugin-download-directory $JENKINS_HOME/plugins \
     --no-download \
     --output txt --plugins kubernetes:1.29.2 \
     --verbose <1>
----

<1> (_Optional_) Allows output of  additional information about plugin dependencies
    and the download process

=== Installing a plugin

> The following command installs version 1.29.2 of Kubernetes plugin & it's dependent plugins. It outputs the list of plugins installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command installs version 1.29.2 of the Kubernetes plugin and its dependent plugins. It outputs the list of plugins installed.
```

[source,bash]
----
java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war \
     --output txt \
     --plugins kubernetes:1.29.2
     --verbose \
     deployit-plugin <1>
----

<1> This options installs the plugin.

Another useful approach to installing a plugin is based on the Jenkins version installed on the controller. This is achieved by the following command to install the relevant version of Kubernetes plugin in a Jenkins environment using version 2.277.3

[source,bash]
----
java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war \
     --jenkins-version 2.277.3 \
     --output txt \
     --plugins kubernetes
     --verbose \
     deployit-plugin
----

=== Upgrading plugin

> The following command upgrades Kubernetes plugin from release 1.29.2 to 1.29.4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command upgrades the Kubernetes plugin from release 1.29.2 to 1.29.4.
```

[source,bash]
----
java -jar ./jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar \
     --war /usr/share/jenkins/jenkins.war \
     --output yaml \
     --plugins kubernetes:1.29.4 \ <1>
     deployit-plugin
----

> <1> Kubernetes plugin is upgraded from 1.29.2 to 1.29.4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The Kubernetes plugin is upgraded from 1.29.2 to 1.29.4
```

=== Using with Docker

> If you use a link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/jenkins[Jenkins docker image], the plugin manager can be invoked inside the container via the bundled jenkins-plugin-cli shell script (specified in Dockerfile) as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use a link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/jenkins[Jenkins docker image], the plugin manager can be invoked inside the container via the bundled jenkins-plugin-cli shell script (specified in the Dockerfile) as follows.
```

[source,bash]
----
FROM jenkins/jenkins:lts-jdk11
jenkins-plugin-cli --plugin-file /your/path/to/plugins.txt --plugins delivery-pipeline-plugin:1.3.2 deployit-plugin
----

=== Using Update Center location

Plugins are downloaded from the update center specified by the appropriate environment variable or command line parameter(s) of the tool mentioned below.

--jenkins-update-center::

> (_Optional_) Sets the main update center filename, which can also be set via $JENKINS_UC environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(_Optional_) Sets the main update center filename, which can also be set via the $JENKINS_UC environment variable.
```

> The command line option will override the value set in the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command line option overrides the value set in the environment variable.
```

The default value is Jenkins project update center location{wj}footnote:UC[https://updates.jenkins.io/update-center.actual.json].

--jenkins-experimental-update-center::

> (_Optional_) Sets the experimental update center location, which can also be set via $JENKINS_UC_EXPERIMENTAL environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(_Optional_) Sets the experimental update center location, which can also be set via the $JENKINS_UC_EXPERIMENTAL environment variable.
```

> The command line option will override the value set in the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command line option overrides the value set in the environment variable.
```

The default value is Jenkins project experimental update center location {wj}footnote:expt[https://updates.jenkins.io/experimental/update-center.actual.json].

--jenkins-incrementals-repo-mirror::

> (_Optional_) Sets the incrementals repository mirror, which can also be set via $JENKINS_INCREMENTALS_REPO_MIRROR environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(_Optional_) Sets the incrementals repository mirror, which can also be set via the $JENKINS_INCREMENTALS_REPO_MIRROR environment variable.
```

The command line option will override the value set in the environment variable.
The default value is the Jenkins project incrementals repository mirror{wj}footnote:incr[https://repo.jenkins-ci.org/incrementals].

--jenkins-plugin-info::

> (_Optional_) Sets the location of plugins' information, which can also be set via '$JENKINS_PLUGIN_INFO' environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(_Optional_) Sets the location of plugins' information, which can also be set via the '$JENKINS_PLUGIN_INFO' environment variable.
```

> The command line option will override the value set in the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command line option overrides the value set in the environment variable.
```

- github-branch-source:2.5.2:https://updates.jenkins.io/2.121/latest/github-branch-source.hpi
                                - the version of plugin used is compatible
                                  with Jenkins release 2.121 specified in the
                                  url regardless of requested version

- github-branch-source:https://updates.jenkins.io/2.121/latest/github-branch-source.hpi
                                - Same as above.

- github-branch-source::https://updates.jenkins.io/2.121/latest/github-branch-source.hpi
                                - Same as above.

----

An example of a *YAML format* plugin list file is listed below.

[source,text]
----
plugins:
  - artifactId: git
    source:
      version: latest
  - artifactId: job-import-plugin
    source:
      version: 2.1
  - artifactId: docker
  - artifactId: cloudbees-bitbucket-branch-source
    source:
      version: 2.4.4
  - artifactId: script-security
    source:
      url: https://get.jenkins.io/plugins/script-security/1.56/script-security.hpi
  - artifactId: workflow-step-api
    groupId: org.jenkins-ci.plugins.workflow
    source:
      version: 2.19-rc289.d09828a05a74
----

> A notable feature of this tool is that a plugin compatible with a specific Jenkins release by using Jenkins version in the *plugin identifier* as shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A notable feature of this tool is that a plugin compatible with a specific Jenkins release can be specified by using the Jenkins version in the *plugin identifier* as shown below
```

[source,text]
----
github-branch-source::https://updates.jenkins.io/2.121/latest/github-branch-source.hpi
----

> Multiple plugins to be installed can be listed in the plugin list file. This file is provided as a command line parameter to +--plugin-file+ command line option of this tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple plugins to be installed can be listed in the plugin list file. This file is provided as a command line parameter to the +--plugin-file+ command line option of this tool.
```

> Note that +--latest--+ command line option should be set to *false* if the versions of the plugins to be installed are specified on the command line or in the plugin list file mentioned above. The default value of +--latest--+ is *true* which enables the installation of latest versions of the plugins specified to be installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the +--latest--+ command line option should be set to *false* if the versions of the plugins to be installed are specified on the command line or in the plugin list file mentioned above. The default value of +--latest--+ is *true* which enables the installation of the latest versions of the plugins.
```

> === Using an HTTP proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Using an HTTP proxy

```

> Proxy support is available using standard link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/net/doc-files/net-properties.html[Java networking system properties] +http.proxyHost+ and +http.proxyPort+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proxy support is available using the standard link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/net/doc-files/net-properties.html[Java networking system properties] +http.proxyHost+ and +http.proxyPort+.
```

[source,bash]
----
java -Dhttp.proxyPort=3128 \
     -Dhttp.proxyHost=myproxy.example.com \
     -jar jenkins-plugin-manager-2.11.0.jar
----

=== Checking plugins for security warnings

> This tool can be used to generate relevant security warnings if they are present in the plugin(s). The following command line options of the tool can be used to check the plugins for security issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tool can be used to generate relevant security warnings if they are present in the plugin(s). Use the following command line options to check the plugins for security issues.
```

--view-security-warnings::

(_Optional_) Set to true to show if any of the user specified plugins have security warnings

--view-all-security-warnings::

(_Optional_) Set to true to show all plugins that have security warnings.

=== Advanced configuration

The following environment variables can be used to make the download of plugins faster and check for data corruption.

$CACHE_DIR::

> used to configure the directory where the plugins update center cache is located.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used to configure the directory where the plugins update center cache is located.
```

The default location is '$JENKINS_USER_HOME_DIR'/.cache/jenkins-plugin-management-cli.
If the user home directory is not defined, then the cache will reside in $(CWD)/.cache/jenkins-plugin-management-cli.

$JENKINS_UC_DOWNLOAD::

> used to configure the URL from where plugins will be downloaded from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure the URL from which plugins will be downloaded.
```

Often used to cache or to proxy the Jenkins plugin download site.

> If set then all plugins will be downloaded through that URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set then all plugins are downloaded through that URL.
```

JENKINS_UC_HASH_FUNCTION::

> used to configure the hash function which checks content from update centers. Currently, SHA1 (deprecated), SHA256 (default), and SHA512 can be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure the hash function which checks content from update centers. Currently, SHA1 (deprecated), SHA256 (default), and SHA512 can be specified.
```
